docs(react-native): video call tutorial (#789)
GetStream/stream-video-js: packages/react-native-sdk/docusaurus/docs/reactnative/02-tutorials/01-video-calling.mdx

description: How to build a video call similar to Zoom or facebook messenger
---

import { TokenSnippet } from '../../../shared/_tokenSnippet.jsx';
import VideoCallVideoView from '../assets/02-tutorials/video-call-video-view.png';
import VideoCallFinishedView from '../assets/02-tutorials/video-call-finished-view.png';

> This tutorial teaches you how to build Zoom/Google Meet style video calling for your app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial teaches you how to build a video calling application in the style of Zoom and Google Meet.
```

- Calls run on Stream's global edge network for optimal latency & reliability.
- Permissions give you fine-grained control over who can do what.
- Video quality and codecs are automatically optimized.

### Step 1 - Create a new project

> You can set up a React Native app using the React Native CLI or Expo. The simplest way is to follow the official [React Native](https://reactnative.dev/docs/environment-setup) docs and create an app using the same.

Author: You mean steps to create a new app? @DaemonLoki

> You can set up a React Native app using the React Native CLI or Expo. The simplest way is to follow the official [React Native](https://reactnative.dev/docs/environment-setup) docs and create an app using the same.

Reviewer: Yes, but as I said, this is not something that I think is necessary.

I just thought from a Developer Experience view: people need to leave our site and then come back to it (maybe they won't come back...).
But just leave it as is, perfectly fine as well! :)

> You can set up a React Native app using the React Native CLI or Expo. The simplest way is to follow the official [React Native](https://reactnative.dev/docs/environment-setup) docs and create an app using the same.

Reviewer 2: I think the better experience is a combination.. lets assume everyone has node and watchman installed by default and say

use `npx react-native@latest init AwesomeProject` to create a new RN app. If you don't have the necessary environment  setup follow the official [React Native environment setup](https://reactnative.dev/docs/environment-setup) docs

> You can set up a React Native app using the React Native CLI or Expo. The simplest way is to follow the official [React Native](https://reactnative.dev/docs/environment-setup) docs and create an app using the same.

Reviewer 2: This is the way I did in Audio room but we can do this later once audio room is merged.. so that we can copy paste it

---

import { TokenSnippet } from '../../../shared/_tokenSnippet.jsx';
import VideoCallVideoView from '../assets/02-tutorials/video-call-video-view.png';
import VideoCallFinishedView from '../assets/02-tutorials/video-call-finished-view.png';

This tutorial teaches you how to build Zoom/Google Meet style video calling for your app.

- Calls run on Stream's global edge network for optimal latency & reliability.
- Permissions give you fine-grained control over who can do what.
- Video quality and codecs are automatically optimized.

### Step 1 - Create a new project

You can set up a React Native app using the React Native CLI or Expo. The simplest way is to follow the official [React Native](https://reactnative.dev/docs/environment-setup) docs and create an app using the same.

### Step 2 - Install the SDK

As a part of Stream's React Native SDK, you would ideally have to install `@stream-io/video-react-native-sdk`.

```bash
yarn add @stream-io/video-react-native-sdk
```

Follow the [installation guide](../../setup/installation) to install Stream Video React Native SDK and other dependencies required for the video call.

### Step 3 - Getting and Setting the credentials

> In order to be able to communicate with Stream's back-end video service, you will need to gather the following values and you can store them either in the environment variables of your project or somewhere else. Make sure it is easily accessible to be used later in the application:

Author: This came to my mind but then, I forgot adding it and was not sure about the flow in Dashboard. Thanks 😄

```bash
STREAM_API_KEY=<api_key>
STREAM_API_SECRET=<api_secret>
```

For testing, you can copy the credentials from the box below:

<TokenSnippet sampleApp="meeting" />

### Step 4 - Create & Join a call

Firstly, we take care of the following:

1. Create a `StreamVideoClient` instance and establish a WS connection

> 2. Provide the `StreamVideoClient` instance to children through `StreamVideo` provider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Provide the `StreamVideoClient` instance to children through the `StreamVideo` provider
```

```tsx title="App.tsx"
import React, { useEffect, useState } from 'react';
import {
  Call,
  StreamCall,
  StreamVideo,
  StreamVideoClient,
} from '@stream-io/video-react-native-sdk';
import { VideoCallUI } from './components/VideoCallUI';

export default function App() {
  const [client] = useState<StreamVideoClient>(() => {
    const user = {
      id: 'your-user-id',
    };
    const token = 'your-user-token';

    return new StreamVideoClient({
      apiKey: STREAM_API_KEY,
      user,
      token,
      options: {
        logLevel: 'warn',
      },
    });
  });

  const callId = 'your-call-id';
  const [call] = useState<Call>(() => client.call('default', callId));

  useEffect(() => {
    const joinCall = async () => {
      await call.join({ create: true });
    };

    joinCall();
  }, [call]);

  return (
    <StreamVideo client={client}>
      <StreamCall call={call}>
        <VideoCallUI />
      </StreamCall>
    </StreamVideo>
  );
}
```

### Step 5 - Adding Native Permissions

:::note
Start using your camera and microphone by learning how to manage your Native Permissions. See the [Manage Native Permissions](../../advanced/native-permissions) guide.
:::

> For this tutorial, we can create the same hook as `useSyncPermissions` as in the [Manage Native Permissions](../../advanced/native-permissions) guide and use it as below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this tutorial, we can create the same hook (`useSyncPermissions`) as in the [Manage Native Permissions](../../advanced/native-permissions) guide and use it as below:
```

export default function App() {
  const [client] = useState<StreamVideoClient>(() => {
    const user = {
      id: 'your-user-id',
    };
    const token = 'your-user-token';

    return new StreamVideoClient({
      apiKey: STREAM_API_KEY,
      user,
      token,
      options: {
        logLevel: 'warn',
      },
    });
  });

  const callId = 'your-call-id';
  const [call] = useState<Call>(() => client.call('default', callId));

  // Added this hook to manage native permissions
  useSyncPermissions();

  useEffect(() => {
    const joinCall = async () => {
      await call.join({ create: true });
    };

    joinCall();
  }, [call]);

  return (
    <StreamVideo client={client}>
      <StreamCall call={call}>
        <VideoCallUI />
      </StreamCall>
    </StreamVideo>
  );
}
```

### Step 6 - Joining from the Web

To make this a little more interactive, let's join the call from your browser.

<TokenSnippet sampleApp="meeting" displayStyle="join" />

On your app, you'll see the new participant from the web, once we add the Video call UI. Let's keep the browser tab open as you go through the tutorial.

### Step 7 - Rendering Video

> In this step, we are going to add the participant's view which displays us the participants video/audio stream and other related info,
> and the call controls view which allows you to control your streaming of audio/video.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this step, we are going to add the participant's view which displays the participants' video and audio stream and other related info.
It also shows the call controls view which allows the user to control their streaming settings of audio and video.
```

To do this we use `CallContentView` and `CallControlsView`.

> The `CallContentView` add the following to the UI automatically:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `CallContentView` adds the following things to the UI automatically:
```

- Indicators of when someone is speaking.
- Quality of their network.
- Layout support for >=2 participants.
- Labels for the participant names, media stream on/off status.

The `CallControlsView` adds the toggle audio/video button, switch camera button and the hang up call button automatically.

An example of the same is shown here:

```tsx title="components/VideoCallUI.tsx"
import React from 'react';
import {
  CallContentView,
  CallControlsView,
} from '@stream-io/video-react-native-sdk';
import { SafeAreaView, StyleSheet } from 'react-native';

export const VideoCallUI = () => {
  return (
    <SafeAreaView style={styles.container}>
      <CallContentView />
      <CallControlsView />
    </SafeAreaView>
  );
};

const styles = StyleSheet.create({
  container: {
    flex: 1,
    backgroundColor: '#272A30',
  },
});
```

![Video Call Video View](../assets/02-tutorials/video-call-video-view.png)

### Step 8 - Full Video Calling UI

Next, we will add the `ParticipantsInfoBadge`, to make our UI complete. It is responsible to handle the following:

> - Show the number of participants in a form of badge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Show the number of participants in the form of a badge.
```

> - Show the info about the participants in a list view with name, status of media streaming.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Show the info about the participants in a list view with the name, and status of media streaming.
```

> - Show available options within the call like Pin participant, enable/disable audio/video, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Show available options within the call like pinning a participant, enabling/disabling audio/video, etc.
```

This is how you can add the same on the existing component.

```tsx title="components/VideoCallUI.tsx"
import React from 'react';
import {
  CallContentView,
  CallControlsView,
  ParticipantsInfoBadge,
} from '@stream-io/video-react-native-sdk';
import { SafeAreaView, StyleSheet, View } from 'react-native';

export const VideoCallUI = () => {
  return (
    <SafeAreaView style={styles.container}>
      <View style={styles.icons}>
        <ParticipantsInfoBadge />
      </View>
      <CallContentView />
      <CallControlsView />
    </SafeAreaView>
  );
};

const styles = StyleSheet.create({
  container: {
    flex: 1,
    backgroundColor: '#272A30',
  },
  icons: {
    position: 'absolute',
    right: 16,
    marginTop: 16,
    flexDirection: 'row',
    alignItems: 'center',
    zIndex: 2,
  },
});
```

![Video Call Finished View](../assets/02-tutorials/video-call-finished-view.png)

### Step 9 - Customizing the UI

> Stream ships with several UI components to make this easy. You can customize the components with theming, props and swapping parts of them. This is convenient if you want to quickly build a production-ready calling experience for your app. (and if you need more flexibility, many customers use the above low-level approach to build a UI from scratch).

Reviewer: We should link to some of the theme-ing pages so that readers know where to look for when they want to do that.

> Stream ships with several UI components to make this easy. You can customize the components with theming, props and swapping parts of them. This is convenient if you want to quickly build a production-ready calling experience for your app. (and if you need more flexibility, many customers use the above low-level approach to build a UI from scratch).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stream ships with several UI components to make this easy. You can customize the components with theming, props, and swapping parts of them. This is convenient if you want to quickly build a production-ready calling experience for your app (and if you need more flexibility, many customers use the above low-level approach to build a UI from scratch).
```

### Recap

Please do let us know if you ran into any issues while building an video calling app with React Native. Our team is also happy to review your UI designs and offer recommendations on how to achieve it with Stream.

To recap what we've learned about Stream video calling:

- You set up a call: (`const call = client.call("default", "your-call-id")`)
- The call type ("default" in the above case) controls which features are enabled and how permissions are setup
- When you join a call, real-time communication is set up for audio & video calling: (`call.join()`)
- State-related hooks such as `useLocalParticipant` make it easy to build your own UI

> - `ParticipantView` is the low-level component that renders audio and video

Reviewer: I love this summary, great idea and execution on that @khushal87 !
